The Purpose Of Life

The purpose of life is to perpetuate itself into eternity - to not become extinct.

Why? Because a life form that can achieve true immortality may have an actual, objective chance of encountering God. Our Universe can only be called successful if it produces such a life form.

Big Chill
How? The life form does not necessarily have to be continuously aware. In a Big Chill scenario, as time goes on, the amount of energy available for maintaining awareness will diminish. Thus, the life form should be made so it can drift through space in suspended animation until a stray photon hits it, giving it enough energy to continue thinking for a short while. It has to be made so that it perceives the passage of time as a succession of moments of awareness made possible by the interaction with the incoming photons. Thus, as photons become more and more scarce, it will have ever fewer of these moments wrt. real time. Interestingly, these moments will form a continuous stream of awareness, which will feel linear, while real time will appear to be continuously accelerating. If objects in the Universe drift apart due to expansion to the point where they pass beyond the observable, then the life form will have no reference as to how much real time has passed, because it will be absolutely still from moment to moment. There will be no clock keeping the time, because that, too, would require energy.

Death
How does this relate to death? Well, when you get knocked out from, say, getting hit in the face with a football, you're just standing there and then, all of a sudden, you're sitting down, surrounded by friends asking you if you're OK. Some length of time will have elapsed, usually a minute or so, but to you it feels as though one moment you were standing up, and the next moment you were sitting down with all your friends surrounding you.

Well, with death it must be the same way, except there is no next moment. The reason it must be the same way is that, when you get knocked out, the part of your brain that measures time stops working for a while. That part of your brain also stops working when you die, only it never starts working again.

If there is a next moment, then that must mean that your awareness has somehow been recovered and is now running on some other (hopefully much more durable) hardware. This is not inconceivable. Just because we cannot recover the necessary information to reconstruct a brain that has been chewed through by earthworms and has decomposed doesn't mean that such information is irrecoverable. A HIGHER POWER might find it easy to recover our brain from information stored in the earthworms' stomachs ;)

If there is a next moment, then that is exactly what it is - the next moment. It may well be a million years from now, but it is the next moment for you.

Similarly, for a machine that indures into eternity, the next moment arrives when it has gathered enough energy to run once more - perhaps enough energy to execute one more instruction. This way, to the awareness running on the machine, moments will succeed each other normally, but in real time eons may pass - eons whose length keeps increasing, because the energy density of the Universe keeps decreasing as it expands.

This can go on ad infinitum, because there is nothing that can destroy this machine. There's nothing left in the Universe with which it can collide. It does not die because of lack of energy. It is alive. It can carry on thinking forever.

The reason there's nothing left in the Universe with which it can collide is that the machine must be launched in such a way that all matter that is not part of the structure of the machine must head away from the machine at escape velocity. There is still a chance that collisions among the matter not involved in the structure of the object will eventually send debris back towards the object. However, this scenario will become increasingly rare, because eventually, due to cosmic expansion, all matter not involved in the structure of the object will be moving away from the object at a speed greater than the speed of light. Thus, the object must store enough energy to avoid collisions until such time as all debris has moved beyond the edge of its observable Universe.

- Or, the object must consist of all the matter in the Universe.

By building this machine we fulfill the purpose of life.

Note that this is not a difficult task. It is relatively easy to build a machine that lasts forever. A wheel is a machine that is relatively sturdy, and will still serve as eternal proof that we have existed. However, the difficulty arises from the fact that we must strive to "send into eternity" as complex a machine as possible - preferably a sentient machine. The more complex the machine which can survive into eternity, the more successful we can count ourselves as a Universe. Our goal should be to maximize the intelectual level of the machine we choose to "send" into eternity - the one machine that survives us all - the offspring of all life in the Universe.

To reiterate: The various possible "emissaries into eternity" form a continuum. At the "low" end, we let the Universe run its course, which entails the possibility that natural processes (such as black holes) eventually destroy all traces of the life that once beheld the wonders of the Universe. We surrender all attempts at sending a message into eternity. Since we are already here, some of our artefacts may accidentally survive into eternity.

It's easy to imagine an improvement to this "low" end scenario. We simply invest in calculating a trajectory for an object that will give it an escape velocity wrt. all nearby structures. For example, if we were to launch the object such that it would come to rest at the exact centre of gravity of an intergalactic bubble of empty space, then cosmic expansion might keep the rest of the Universe from ever sending a projectile on a collision course with our object. This would allow the object to survive undamaged into eternity.

Assuming such a trajectory is possible, the next step would be to build such an object.

Relationship to God
Note that none of this precludes the existence of God, nor does it preclude the possibility that God interacts with the Universe. It is simply a way of ensuring that the Universe always contains at least one sentient life form.

My inspiration
I drew my inspiration from Arthur C. Clarke's and Gentry Lee's Rama series. My first thought was that it's not so much that I hope something like that happens in my lifetime, that it should be our goal to participate in such things as illustrated in the book, but it should be our goal to build Rama.

It is much more important to survive in space for an arbitrary period of time than it is to colonize other planets. That's because there's a lot more empty space out there than planets. To get anywhere, we'll be spending extremely long periods of time in space and presumably far away from any and all energy sources.

The normal course of action should be to first survive comfortably in space, and then develop the capabilities of retrieving resources from planets, asteroids, stars, or wherever happens to be accessible at the moment. So, the idea is that there's plenty of time to go down and visit, say, Mars, because we can comfortably orbit it for months, years, decades, even centuries, until we can be certain that the equipment we've developed for landing is in adequate shape for the task. A glorified hold-your-breath-for-two-years (meaning that we depend for survival on the resources we've packed - resources including oxygen - resources that are limited and unreplenishable) mission to Mars is not the long-term answer to our survival.

One important goal we must achieve for prolonged survival in space is not just for all life-sustaining prerequisites inside our habitat to be within tolerance, but we must also have a way of continuously checking how far within tolerance we are. We must be able to answer questions such as "Can we import another human into our habitat without also having to import another tree?" We must develop very precise means of measuring how much more stress our habitat can endure before it becomes uninhabitable. Of course, this assumes that we are capable of developing a completely self-contained habitat. I'm thinking something like Rama, but much, much smaller. Ideally it should be completely opaque with artificial lighting on the inside, just like Rama, because we do not want to assume the presence of a star in our designs. We should store energy from a star or from whatever other source, but we should then produce our own light from it.

A hunch
We have within us an innate sense of when we are contributing towards the goal of "sending into eternity" such a machine, and when we are not.

It is not only those who study machine learning, or the frontiers of physics who are contributing to the eventual construction of such a machine. Their work rests upon a vast foundation - a working, progressive, responsible society that offers security and peace-of-mind. Those providing such a society contribute equally to the project by enabling the work towards the construction of the machine. It is actually very easy to contribute, and most of us do it by default. In fact, the only detractant from contribution is when one turns a blind eye. We can fail. In our ignorance we may think we are on the right path, but we fail to consider all implications of our actions. For example, most progress towards understanding the environmental impact we are having on our planet comes from achieving insights into previously unfathomed consequences of our actions. These unforeseen consequences are the abyss along whose edge we are constantly walking, and whenever we turn a blind eye, we pass up an opportunity for gaining the insight that will allow us to stave  off our extinction a while longer.

Tasks:
- Prove that it is possible to construct such a machine
  - Can a machine survive near absolute zero while maintaining its function?

- What about a Big Crunch scenario? Does it make sense to consider this scenario for completeness sake?
